Message tags updates (#373)
ircv3/ircv3-specifications: extensions/message-tags.md

    <tag>           ::= <key> ['=' <escaped_value>]
    <key>           ::= [ <client_prefix> ] [ <vendor> '/' ] <key_name>
    <client_prefix> ::= '+'
    <key_name>      ::= <non-empty sequence of ascii letters, digits, hyphens ('-')>

>     <escaped_value> ::= <sequence of zero or more utf8 characters except NUL, CR, LF, semicolon (`;`) and SPACE>

Reviewer: This retroactively breaks networks which use non-utf8 charset

Author: Which existing tags allow non utf8?

Reviewer: In the value? Any non-standard one.

But I was more refering to the concept of requiring UTF-8. E.g. in ZNC charset is applied to the whole line, before parsing of tags even begins. I hope you don't want UTF-8 to be encoded inside some other encoding.

Author: How is znc going to handle client sent utf8 in future?

Author: Also, we don’t need to care about non standard implementations.

Reviewer: IRC is defined in terms of octets, not UTF-8 text. If we are to change that, that should be done explicitly, in a separate spec, not retroactively baked into some obscure line in one of unrelated specs.

> How is znc going to handle client sent utf8 in future?

There are settings for that.

Author: I am focused on new parts of the protocol here, not changing things retroactively. I want to ensure everyone can assume a sane encoding for new features, so we can avoid some of the short sightedness of the past. This seemed like a good place to enforce this for new tags. What would be a more appropriate way of doing this?

Author: > There are settings for that.

Does this mean the default would already be “broken” behaviour as you call it? I’m not sure how this changes anything in that case.

Reviewer: > What would be a more appropriate way of doing this?

Instead of changing things subtly and retroactively, change them explicitly. I generally agree with usage of UTF-8 everywhere. But need to write a separate spec which defines UTF-8 as the encoding, which discusses how to enable this (cap? implicitly?), and how it should interact with other protocol features, with existing software out there.

> Does this mean the default would already be “broken” behaviour as you call it?

Define "broken".

> I’m not sure how this changes anything in that case.

Here's an example.

Client <--- UTF-8 ---> ZNC <--- KOI8-R ---> Server

If client sends a message, ZNC interprets it as UTF-8, but sends it to server as KOI8-R. If server sends a message, ZNC decodes it from KOI8-R, and sends to client as UTF-8.

Now imagine that the message had some tags, and the value of one of characters in some tag is outside of ASCII range. What exactly is supposed to happen here?

Author: Broken was your word, I’m not sure how you’re defining it.

With your example, what would you do in znc right now if that happens?

Reviewer: Now the whole line gets reencoded, including tags. So by changing the requirement for tags to be utf-8, you're retroactively breaking existing software, which suddenly wouldn't be conformant anymore.

Author: The KOI8-R "server" you're talking about is actually just an encoding unaware relay. The KOI8-R data you're dealing with is in message bodies that users on that server have decided to use amongst each other. The clients of those users could already start sending utf8 data in tags while still allowing KOI8-R in messages. The server could also add utf8 tag data of its own if it wanted. Your whole line encoding might already not deal with that very well so it's already a "broken" situation you will likely need to address. And if you can assume tags are always utf8, this is actually much easier for you to address.

All I'm proposing is that defined, specified new tag values MUST be utf8. This is designed to make things easier. I don't think the existing tags we have (server-time, account-tag, batch) are at much risk of containing non-utf8 data.

Reviewer: > The KOI8-R "server" you're talking about is actually just an encoding unaware relay. 

Unfortunately, it's not. Server actually has several ports, and uses different encoding on each. So client connected on port 6667 and client connected on port 6668 use different encodings, while still talking to each other.

> The server could also add utf8 tag data of its own if it wanted

So where is the split between utf8 and the other encoding? End of tags? Again, this needs a separate spec and a separate discussion.

Author: Ok so in that case, your russian re-encoding server will have to deal with this, not you. And if it's in the spec, that's doable. I think we can agree this is a rather niche case, isn't it?

Why is the tags spec not a good place to specify the encoding of tags?

Author: I've removed the "utf8" bit from this PR for now and will move it its own PR.

receiving messages with more than one occurrence of a tag key SHOULD discard all
but the final occurrence.

> A tag with an empty value (e.g. `foo=`) MAY be considered equivalent to a tag missing a value (e.g. `foo`). Specifications MUST NOT assign different meanings to tags with empty or missing values.

Reviewer 2: I think this should be a `MUST` and (to make the message smaller) the `foo` form should be stated as the canonical form.

Author: Imagine a basic parser looking like this:

```python
tags = 'foo;bar='
[part.split('=') for part in tags.split(';')]
# [['foo'],['bar','']]
```

Saying that implementations MAY consider empty/missing as equivalent *allows* a normalisation step without *requiring* it, and saying that specs MUST NOT differentiate makes that safe.

Changing the MAY to a MUST seems like forcing extra awkwardness on implementations for no real gain. Implementations might decide there's a gain *for them* but the spec certainly doesn't need it.

Reviewer 2: It's not incompatible with a MUST to parse it like example but then check the values properly if they get compared.

Reviewer 3: As currently written it feels like it's saying that specs can't assign different meanings to a tag when it has a value vs the same tag when it's not given a value at all, when what's actually intended is that specs can't treat the `a=` and `a` case differently. Maybe we could use the term _"tags with empty **vs** missing values"_ or similar to make it clear what we mean here?

For what it's worth I don't mind making it a MUST to ensure they're treated the same way, but I'm unsure about specifying which one software has to send out.

Reviewer 2: There is a potential issue with a client tag `+a` being rewritten by a server to `+a=` and then the whole set of client tags may not fit in the outbound buffer. We should state that servers MUST NOT rewrite relayed client tags with a missing value from `+a` to `+a=`. This also applies more generally (i.e. not adding spurious backslashes).

Author: The size limits already forbid this. Let’s not bog down specs by repeating things covered elsewhere ad nauseam to cover minor edge cases with non compliant implementations.

PS also this thread applies to outdated code so is hidden, worth replying elsewhere.

Reviewer 2: "The server MAY unescape tag values after receiving data and escape those values before sending them out."

> The size limits already forbid this.

Where is this specified?

> non compliant implementations

It's not non-compliant; `+a` is equivalent to `+a=` so a server implementation that finds it easier to always output `+a=` can do so.

(These comments aren't hidden on the PR page.)

Author: Read the size limit section. Servers and clients are forbidden from overflowing the output buffers. Hence, non-compliant.

Reviewer 2: I'm not suggesting the server would overflow it, but could be forced to omit a client tag when it doesn't fit on the end because of missing values being rewritten as empty values.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this possibility is worth us worrying about at all in the specification.

Author: Should be resolved by https://github.com/ircv3/ircv3-specifications/pull/373/commits/ed7ad5bb33f835708f3383d52c01643c4e4e1898

> Implementations MAY consider a tag with an empty value (e.g. `foo=`) as equivalent to a tag missing a value (e.g. `foo`). Specifications MUST NOT assign different meanings to tags with empty or missing values.

Author: How about

```suggestion
Implementations MUST interpret empty tag values (e.g. `foo=`) as equivalent to missing tag values (e.g. `foo`). They MAY normalise such tags to a single form. Specifications MUST NOT differentiate meaning between tags with empty and missing values.
```

Reviewer 3: Perfect, well said
